.TH EMON 1 "2026-06-11" "emon 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
emon \- multi-port serial monitor with pattern detection for embedded devices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emon
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIPORT\fR [\fIPORT2\fR ...]
.br
.B emon
.IR stop | status
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B emon
is a multi-port serial monitor designed for embedded device fleets.
It watches one or more serial ports simultaneously, detects events using configurable
regex pattern files, logs output per device, and can trigger actions (hardware reset,
exit codes, JSON events) on pattern matches.
.PP
Ports can be specified as full paths (\fI/dev/ttyUSB0\fR) or bare names (\fIttyACM0\fR).
.SH INSTALL
.SS Debian / Ubuntu
.EX
curl -fsSL https://apt.espilon.net/espilon.gpg.key | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /etc/apt/trusted.gpg.d/espilon.gpg
echo "deb https://apt.espilon.net stable main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/espilon.list
sudo apt update && sudo apt install emon
.EE
.SS macOS (Homebrew)
.EX
brew tap EspilonOrg/tap
brew install emon
.EE
.SS Arch Linux (AUR)
.EX
yay -S emon
.EE
.SS Build from source
.EX
git clone https://github.com/EspilonOrg/emon && cd emon
make
PREFIX=~/.local make install
.EE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-baud " N"
Set baud rate (default: 115200).
.TP
.BI \-\-auto\-patterns " dir"
Automatically load \fIdir\fR/\fIfamily\fR.pat after detecting the device family
from USB VID/PID or passive serial read.
.TP
.BI \-\-patterns " file" ", " \-p " file"
Load an extra \fI.pat\fR pattern file. Can be repeated.
.TP
.BI \-\-logdir " dir"
Write per-device \fI<name>.log\fR and \fI<name>_events.log\fR files under \fIdir\fR.
Logging is disabled if this option is not set.
.TP
.BI \-\-name " port" = name
Assign a friendly name to a port (used in log filenames and output).
.TP
.B \-\-auto\-reset
Automatically assert RTS/DTR to reset the device when a CRITICAL event fires.
.TP
.BI \-\-context " N"
Save \fIN\fR pre-event context lines in the events log (default: 10; 0 = disabled).
.TP
.BI \-\-exit\-on " RULE" [ =N ]
Exit with code \fIN\fR (default 0) when the named pattern rule fires.
.TP
.BI \-\-wait\-for " RULE"
Block until the named pattern fires, then exit 0. Exit 124 on timeout.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " secs"
Exit 124 after \fIsecs\fR seconds. Combine with \fB\-\-exit\-on\fR or \fB\-\-wait\-for\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-flow\-control " mode"
Set serial flow control.
.I mode
is one of \fBnone\fR (default), \fBrtscts\fR (hardware), or \fBxonxoff\fR (software).
.TP
.B \-\-hex
Hex dump mode: display raw bytes as aligned \fIOFFSET  HEX  |ASCII|\fR rows
(16 bytes per row). Pattern detection remains active - events still fire
and \fB\-\-exit\-on\fR / \fB\-\-wait\-for\fR work normally.
.TP
.BI \-\-on\-event " script"
Call \fIscript\fR via \fBpython3\fR(1) on every matched event.
A JSON payload is written to the script's stdin:
.RS
.PP
.EX
{"rule":"NAME","severity":"CRITICAL","device":"ttyUSB0",
 "line":"<matched line>","ts":<unix ms>}
.EE
.RE
.IP
The script runs as a fire-and-forget subprocess (double-fork); the monitor
is never blocked.
Up to 8 scripts may be registered with repeated \fB\-\-on\-event\fR flags.
See \fIdocs/hooks.md\fR for examples.
.TP
.B \-\-json\-events
Emit an NDJSON record to stdout for each detected event.
Suitable for piping into \fBjq\fR or log aggregators.
.TP
.B \-\-tui
Launch a split-pane TUI with one pane per device (pure ANSI, no ncurses).
Key bindings: Tab = next pane, Enter = send line to device, Ctrl+A [ = scrollback,
Ctrl+Q = quit.
.TP
.B \-\-interactive ", " \-i
Enable bidirectional mode: stdin is forwarded to the target device.
Optionally followed by a port name to target a specific port in multi-port mode.
Ctrl+A key combos: X = quit, A = send literal Ctrl+A, H = help.
.TP
.BI \-\-interactive " port"
Select which port receives stdin in multi-port interactive mode.
.TP
.B \-\-bg
Double-fork and run as a background daemon. PID file is written to \fIlogdir/\fR.
.TP
.B \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print all serial output lines, not just detected events.
.TP
.B \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Print only detected events (overrides \fB\-\-verbose\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color output.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-timestamps
Disable timestamps in output.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " file"
Load settings from an INI-style config file before processing CLI arguments.
.TP
.B \-\-list
List available serial ports and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH SUB-COMMANDS
.TP
.B stop
Stop a running background daemon (reads PID from \fIlogdir/\fR).
.TP
.B status
Print whether a background daemon is running.
.SH PATTERN FILES
Pattern files use the format:
.PP
.RS
.I SEVERITY  NAME  REGEX
.RE
.PP
\fISEVERITY\fR is one of \fBCRITICAL\fR, \fBHIGH\fR, \fBWARN\fR, \fBINFO\fR.
\fINAME\fR is an identifier (used with \fB\-\-exit\-on\fR / \fB\-\-wait\-for\fR).
\fIREGEX\fR is a POSIX extended regular expression matched against each line.
Lines starting with \fB#\fR are comments.
.PP
Built-in families (loaded via \fB\-\-auto\-patterns\fR): \fBesp32\fR, \fBstm32\fR,
\fBarduino\fR, \fBfreertos\fR, \fBzephyr\fR, \fBesp\-idf\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I patterns/*.pat
Pattern rule files for supported device families.
.TP
.I logs/<name>.log
Per-device serial output log (when \fB\-\-logdir\fR is set).
.TP
.I logs/<name>_events.log
Per-device events log with pre-event context.
.TP
.I logs/.emon.pid
PID file written by daemon mode.
.SH EXAMPLES
Monitor two ports, auto-detect family, log to /tmp/emon:
.PP
.RS
.B emon --auto-patterns patterns/ --logdir /tmp/emon ttyUSB0 ttyACM0
.RE
.PP
CI: wait for boot message, exit 0 or 124 on 30s timeout:
.PP
.RS
.B emon --wait-for HANDSHAKE_OK --timeout 30 --json-events /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.PP
Run as background daemon:
.PP
.RS
.B emon --auto-patterns patterns/ --bg --logdir /opt/emon/logs /dev/ttyUSB1
.br
.B emon stop
.RE
.PP
Hex dump a binary protocol stream:
.PP
.RS
.B emon --hex /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.PP
Hardware flow control + event hook:
.PP
.RS
.B emon --flow-control rtscts --on-event hooks/alert.py --patterns patterns/esp32.pat /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.PP
Load all settings from a config file:
.PP
.RS
.B emon --config .emon.conf /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit, or pattern matched for \fB\-\-wait\-for\fR / \fB\-\-exit\-on\fR with code 0.
.TP
.B 1
Error (port not found, monitor init failed, etc.).
.TP
.B 124
Timeout elapsed (\fB\-\-timeout\fR) without the wait pattern firing.
.TP
.I N
Custom exit code set by \fB\-\-exit\-on RULE=N\fR.
.SH AUTHOR
Eun0us <eun0us@espilon.net>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR screen (1),
.BR minicom (1),
.BR picocom (1)
